# Application overview
HAProxy is a free, very fast and reliable reverse-proxy offering high availability, load balancing, and proxying for TCP and HTTP-based applications. It is particularly suited for very high traffic web sites and powers a significant portion of the world's most visited ones. Over the years it has become the de-facto standard opensource load balancer, is now shipped with most mainstream Linux distributions, and is often deployed by default in cloud platforms.

NGINX is a free, open-source, high-performance HTTP server and reverse proxy, as well as an IMAP/POP3 proxy server. NGINX is known for its high performance, stability, rich feature set, simple configuration, and low resource consumption.

The architecture includes three Docker containers, one with a haproxy server and two others each with their own web server.  This allows local interfacing with the servers using a browser or telnet from the same LAN.  Haproxy handles incoming HTTP requests and forwards them to one of the web servers according to its load-balancing logic.  Similarly, it handles forwarding any corresponding responses generated by the same web server.  For each of the web servers, Nginx handles all incoming HTTP requests that come in over the enabled ports and generates appropriate HTTP responses for them.  Remote access to the NGINX server over http is possible, but ports must be enabled through any firewalls (e.g., ports 80 and 81).

## Server (on UbuntuServerx86-64-target VM)
The VM is using Ubuntu Server OS, version 20.04.  It is designed to run within a Docker container in our [UbuntuServerx86-64-target VM](https://github.com/jhu-information-security-institute/NwSec/blob/master/config/UbuntuServerX86-64/targetVm-README.md).

## Client
The client that communicates with the web server is any remote browser.  One can also directly interface by manually applying direct http commands using telnet over port 8080.  E.g., see the command/response sequence below (note: commands have no indentation and  responses are indented).
<pre><code>
$ # telnet web.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu 8080
Trying 192.168.25.121...
Connected to 192.168.25.121.
Escape character is '^]'.
GET /
    &lt!doctype html&gt
    &lthtml&gt
    &lthead&gt
        &ltmeta charset="utf-8"&gt
        &lttitle&gtHello, Students!&lt/title&gt
    &lt/head&gt
    &ltbody&gt
        &lth1&gtHello, EN.650.624 Network Security Students!&lt/h1&gt
        &ltp&gtWe have just configured our Nginx web server on Ubuntu Server!&lt/p&gt
    &lt/body&gt
    &lt/html&gt
Connection closed by foreign host.
</code></pre>

# Runtime environment setup
## Server (on VM)
1. Download files to build container
    ```
    $ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jhu-information-security-institute/NwSec/master/applications/websvr/websvr-UbuntuServerX86-64.sh
    $ chmod +x websvr-UbuntuServerX86-64.sh
    $ ./websvr-UbuntuServerX86-64.sh
    ```
1. Build, run, attach to proxy container
   ```
   $ docker build -t tproxysvr -f Dockerfile.proxy . 
   $ docker run -d --name webproxy --hostname proxy.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu --add-host proxy.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu:127.0.1.1 --dns 192.168.25.10 --dns-search netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu --privileged --security-opt seccomp=unconfined --cgroup-parent=docker.slice --cgroupns private --tmpfs /tmp --tmpfs /run --tmpfs /run/lock --network bridge -p 8080:80 --cpus=1 tproxysvr:latest
   $ docker exec -it proxysvr bash 
   ```
1. Setup proxy server (in the container, you will likely need to temporarily add 8.8.8.8 as a dns server in /etc/resolv.conf).  The /run/haproxy file must be created or haproxy startup could fail.
   ```
   # apt-get update
   # apt-get install haproxy
   # mkdir -p /run/haproxy
   ```
1. Edit /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg and add
   ```
   frontend myfrontend
       bind 0.0.0.0:80
       default_backend myservers

   backend myservers
       server web1 web1.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu:8081
       server web2 web2.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu:8082
   ```
   
1. Build, run, attach to web containers.  Last two commands need to be from different shells.
    ```
    $ docker build -t twebsvr .
    $ docker run -d --name websvr1 --hostname web1.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu --add-host web1.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu:127.0.1.1 --dns 192.168.25.10 --dns-search netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu --privileged --security-opt seccomp=unconfined --cgroup-parent=docker.slice --cgroupns private --tmpfs /tmp --tmpfs /run --tmpfs /run/lock --network bridge -p 8081:80 --cpus=1 twebsvr:latest 
    $ docker run -d --name websvr2 --hostname web2.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu --add-host web2.netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu:127.0.1.1 --dns 192.168.25.10 --dns-search netsec-docker.isi.jhu.edu --privileged --security-opt seccomp=unconfined --cgroup-parent=docker.slice --cgroupns private --tmpfs /tmp --tmpfs /run --tmpfs /run/lock --network bridge -p 8082:80 --cpus=1 twebsvr:latest 
    $ docker exec -it websvr1 bash
    $ docker exec -it websvr2 bash 
    ```
1. Enable the server using: `$ sudo systemctl enable nginx`
1. Ensure that you have at least one server entry located in `/etc/nginx/sites-available`
1. Ensure that your server entries have symbolic links located in `/etc/nginx/sites-available`
1. Reload the configuration by running `$ sudo systemctl daemon-reload`
1. Restart the server by running `$ sudo systemctl start nginx`
1. Make each /var/www/nwsec/index.html unique
1. Pages should be viewable in a browser at one of the following urls: `http://192.168.25.121:8081` or `http://192.168.25.122:8082`

# Notes
* Restart the server using: `$ sudo systemctl restart nginx`
* Check the server status (there should be no errors) using: `$ sudo systemctl status nginx`
* View the server log: `$ sudo journalctl -u nginx`
* Configure the server by editing server entries located in `/etc/nginx/sites-available`
* Enable sites by adding symbolic links in `/etc/nginx/sites-available` that link back to server entry counterparts in `/etc/nginx/sites-available`

# Useful websites
* https://www.nginx.com
* https://www.nginx.com/resources/wiki
* https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/install-and-configure-nginx
* https://docs.suricata.io/en/latest/rules/header-keywords.html
